welcome to topcast and to the next
episode in my readings from and
reflections upon the fabric of reality
and today it's chapter five virtual
reality and really this chapter is like
a mini exploration of the entire book
itself it's very synecdocy if you know
the term the idea that part of the whole
can represent the whole and what i
continue to marvel at in this book is
its prescience in a sense which is kind
of silly it's a silly thing to say
because david of course is the author
but it seems prescient in retrospect
because it seems to predict so much of
the content of the beginning of infinity
that absolutely has astounded everyone
that has read it ever since but all that
means really is that i just continue to
be amazed how much i missed the first
time around with the fabric of reality
but again i forgive myself i was only 20
years old at its publication and
extremely busy at that time and so it
was a lot to absorb and today we're
going to cover in this one chapter
computation and universality the nature
of personhood to some extent and the
centrality of explanations the nature of
mathematics and the limits upon it
imposed by physics and lots lots more
all of those huge themes that come up
here on topcast because they feature so
heavily in the work of david deutch more
broadly so no long introduction today
let's just get into some reading chapter
five virtual reality and david writes
the theory of computation has
traditionally been studied almost
entirely in the abstract as a topic in
pure mathematics this is to miss the
point of it computers are physical
objects and computations are physical
processes what computers can or cannot
compute is determined by the laws of
physics alone and not by pure
mathematics one of the most important
concepts of the theory of computation is
universality a universal computer is
usually defined as an abstract machine
that can mimic the computations of any
other abstract machine in a certain
well-defined class however the
significance of universality lies in the
fact that universal computers or at
least good approximations to them can
actually be built and can be used to
compute not just each other's behavior
but the behavior of interesting physical
and abstract entities the fact that this
is possible is part of the
self-similarity of physical reality that
i mentioned in the previous chapter the
best known physical manifestation of
universality is an area of technology
that has been muted for decades but is
only now beginning to take off namely
virtual reality just pausing their my
reflection and of course i'm going to
come back to this throughout the chapter
but not to harp on about it but remember
that this book was written in 1997 so
now 25 years later not only has virtual
reality begun to take off it is routine
to find it in all sorts of places in
society not least people's homes as an
entertainment device i know i've got one
a ps4 vr machine and the ps4 vr machine
is one of the lower cost ones but it's
still fantastic for a whole bunch of
things and i will come back to precisely
that let's go back to the book and david
writes quote the term refers virtual
reality to any situation in which a
person is artificially given the
experience of being in a specified
environment for example a flight
simulator a machine that gives pilots
the experience of flying aircraft
without having to leave the ground is a
type of virtual reality generator such a
machine or more precisely the computer
that controls it can be programmed with
the characteristics of a real or
imaginary aircraft the aircraft's
environment such as the weather and the
layout of airports can also be specified
in the program
and quote and just my reflection on that
because from here david goes on for a
few paragraphs talking about the
operation of a flight simulator which i
won't like i say 25 years after he wrote
this because this chapter is referring
to some specific technologies which at
the time were extremely new but now
people i think are far more familiar
with them we don't need the detailed
description like i say personally i love
my ps4 vr machine it's great there's a
number of first person shooter games you
can get with these virtual reality
things i've got this game called
farpoint it's the name of this game
where you're on an alien planet just
filled with spiders and the spiders can
jump and lots of them are massive i
wouldn't say it's realistic but it's
realistic enough it's very cool very
scary and so you are you are totally
immersed because visually you're totally
immersed and you you've got their
headphones in and so of course auditory
you're totally immersed but your other
senses are not but it's enough it's
enough to have just your hearing in your
sight of course completely consumed by
the vr machine to make you feel like
you're really there on this alien planet
somewhere other shooting at spiders that
are jumping at you and attacking you and
the vr of course is not only taking off
it just continues to get better and
better and the only annoying thing at
the moment is the weight of the headset
like how cumbersome these things are in
many places even the wireless ones are
still rather cumbersome and focusing at
the goggles for me has always been a bit
of a pain but otherwise like i say it's
fully immersive as far as sight and
hearing goes so i'm skipping all of this
section where david is
giving us an overview of the functioning
of flight simulators especially for
people who at the time wouldn't have
been familiar with these things hardly
at all so i'm going to pick it up where
david is introducing a piece of
nomenclature for the purpose of this
chapter and he says quote i shall use
the term image generator for any device
such as a planetarium a high fire system
or a spice rack which can generate
specifiable sensory input for the user
specified pictures sounds odors and so
on all count as images for example to
generate the olfactory image i.e the
smell of vanilla one opens the vanilla
bottle from the spice rack to generate
the auditory image i.e the sound of
mozart's 20th piano concerto one plays
the corresponding compact disc on the
hifi system any image generator is a
rudimentary sort of virtual reality
generator but the term virtual reality
is usually reserved for cases where
there is both a wide coverage of the
user's sensory range and a substantial
element of interaction kicking back
between the user and the simulated
entities end quote okay so like i say
that's just a bit of nomenclature to be
used in this chapter this image
generator idea and we'll need it in
what's to come okay so i'm skipping
again i've swathed or the beginning of
this chapter i'm going to pick it up
where david writes quote if bishop
berkeley or the inquisition had known of
virtual reality they would probably have
seized upon it as the perfect
illustration of the deceitfulness of the
senses backing up their arguments
against scientific reasoning what would
happen if the pilot of a flight
simulator tried to use dr johnson's test
for reality although the simulated
aircraft and its surroundings do not
really exist they do kick back at the
pilot just as if they would if they did
exist the pilot can open the throttle
and hear the engines roar in response
and feel their thrust through the seat
and see them through the window
vibrating and blasting out hot gas in
spite of the fact that there are no
engines there at all the pilots may
experience the aircraft through a storm
and hear the thunder and see the rain
driving against the windscreen though
none of those things is there in reality
what is outside the cockpit in reality
is just a computer some hydraulic jacks
television screens and loudspeakers and
a perfectly dry and stationary room does
this invalidate dr johnson's refutation
of solipsism no
his conversation with boswell could just
as well have taken place inside a flight
simulator i refute it thus he might have
said opening the throttle and feeling
the simulated engine kick there is no
engine there what kicks back is
ultimately a computer running a program
that calculates what an engine would do
if it were kicked but those calculations
which are external to dr johnson's mind
respond to the throttle in the same
complex and autonomous way as the engine
would therefore they pass the test for
reality and rightly so for in fact these
calculations are physical processes
within the computer and the computer is
an ordinary physical object no less than
an engine and perfectly real the fact
that it is not a real engine is
irrelevant to the argument against
solipsism after all not everything that
is real has to be easy to identify end
quote just to explain that a little bit
more here the idea is that the external
reality is real even if it's a virtual
reality that that virtual reality is not
part of the person it's autonomous and
outside of the person having the
experience remember the whole idea here
if we go back to previous chapters where
david was talking about idealism the
bishop berkeley referenced there these
philosophers thought that well you could
have this situation where you're
dreaming reality into existence it's all
ideas and it's all coming from we then
knew this ancient idea really so
solipsism is the claim that only you
exist in the universe and that you are
dreaming everything into reality now
what is our philosophical refutation
against that it's that most of reality
is acting in an autonomous way a way
that you cannot possibly predict or
explain without going out and
investigating your own mind or what is
supposedly your own mind which it turns
out has all of the richness of objective
reality an external reality beyond your
mind so you're just adding realism the
claim that there is an external
objective physical reality beyond your
mind you're adding to that that simple
statement of realism the additional
assumption but you're dreaming it all
okay and so
here what david is saying is even if
even if you were going to be given all
of this if you know you're sort of born
into a virtual reality machine or
something like that well it would still
not show that solipsism is real it would
still show that something was external
to you namely the computer running all
of this i would say it's like the
difference between the person having the
experience and what is generating the
experience
during a dream it is the case that the
contents of the dream are produced by
the person having the experience
and there might be subjective
unpredictability there but what won't
happen is a rich experience of something
you've never experienced before a rich
experience you will not dream of having
the actual experience of walking down
let's say the main street of melbourne
australia if you have never done that
before or seen it and so on sure you may
dream an experience of that but not the
actual experience which will contain
specifics accurate specifics you can't
just dream up
what particular buildings are actually
there what shops and signs and side
streets you will pass and so on what
actually is the case in melbourne in the
main street of melbourne is actually the
case and you can't just dream that into
existence unless you've already had it
you might have a dream of an experience
but it won't be an accurate
representation of the real reality of
what's going on in the main street of
melbourne on the other hand of course if
you have had that experience and in
particular if it's an experience you
have daily because of your commute to
work every single day going up and down
the main street of melbourne then it
might be the case your dreams will
contain accurate specifics a virtual
reality generator could give you such an
experience even though you've never had
it before in reality because it is part
of external reality the reality external
to you okay so once again i'm skipping a
couple of pages and i shall pick it up
where david writes quote virtual reality
rendering might seem to fall into the
same philosophical category as illusions
false trials and coincidences for these
two are phenomena which seem to show us
something real but actually mislead us
we have seen that the scientific world
view can accommodate indeed expects the
existence of highly misleading phenomena
it is par excellence the world view that
can accommodate both human fallibility
and external sources of error
nevertheless misleading phenomena are
basically unwelcome end quote
someone once described david deutsch's
writing as extremely knowledge dense
you're getting a lot of information
packed into a
small amount of words okay he's very
efficient on the words in order to
convey such deep ideas and here's here's
an example of that we've got there
refutations of uh empiricism claims
about human fallibility the the idea of
errors and correcting errors and not
being able to of course experience
things as they are so let's just unpack
this a little bit what does it mean that
we have seen that the scientific
worldview can accommodate indeed expects
the existence of highly misleading
phenomena well i would say this is a
kind of
refutation of empiricism empiricism
remember is this philosophical position
that some scientists especially claim to
hold that we get information about
reality via our senses seeing is
believing in other words this is what
empiricism amounts to but as we've been
at pains to explain here
most of what we see out there experience
with our senses is highly misleading and
our trope example that we go to all the
time is looking up into the sky at night
and seeing what stars apparently are
that's highly misleading it's misleading
to think that what your the information
you're getting from your senses there
just your bare senses is it all going to
actually tell you what the true nature
of a star is after all it appears to us
it seems to any human being that what
the star is is a tiny dim prick of white
light cold and perhaps closer than they
are you don't get a sense of just how
far away stars are
most of the ones that you can see in the
night sky are going to be some
tens or hundreds and perhaps at absolute
most uh thousands in the case of the
very brightest ones light years away you
don't get a sense of what a light you're
is by looking at any bright point of
light in the sky at night after all some
of them are nowhere near as far away as
that they're the planets they're not
even stars at all and as for most of
their stars being cold and dim no the
exact opposite okay so we're getting
very misleading information from our
senses when you take your finger and you
rub it across a smooth surface the desk
in front of you the window plane beside
you something like that you feel
continuity you feel matter as if it is
not made up of particles your your
senses your physical sensation of touch
is unable to discriminate
at any level between the atoms out of
which that matter is truly made so we
are misled rather often by our senses
but what does science do science error
corrects that despite the fact we are
fallible as david mentions there are
human fallibility and not only are we
fallible there's external sources of
error as well there's you know our
measuring devices can go wrong despite
that the scientific worldview
accommodates all of this it expects it
and it accommodates all of this how
by correcting errors in all of that
sense data we have we conjecture
explanations and then what's the purpose
what do we use the evidence that the
sense data that we're gathering we use
that in order to discriminate to decide
between theories we've already guessed
i'm skipping a little and david goes on
to say quote we shall see that the
existence of virtual reality does not
indicate that the human capacity to
understand the world is inherently
limited but on the contrary that it is
inherently unlimited end quote pausing
there and i think you can guess what i'm
going to say
wow it's one of those things that's one
of those quotes there where you just
have to say
well well well
that's the beginning of infinity here in
chapter five of the fabric of reality
let's read it again because it's just
it's a perfect encapsulation of the
one of the deepest themes of the
beginning of infinity even though it's
not in the beginning of infinity we
might as well say nothing indicates
quote that the human capacity to
understand the world is inherently
limited
but on the contrary that it is
inherently unlimited
end quote true we human beings are
people and people are defined by their
capacity to create explanatory knowledge
and
that capacity to create explanatory
knowledge is universal it can be turned
in any direction onto any problem about
any phenomena there is nothing that
there is no phenomena for which we
cannot generate an explanation we are
universal in our capacity to generate
explanations because if someone puts
forward something that we say that is
claimed not to be explicable then they
would have to have an explanation as to
why that thing is not explicable but
that would be a problem that would be
soluble but more importantly than that
as david likes to say any claim that a
particular phenomena is inexplicable to
human beings is nothing but an appeal to
the supernatural it's just going back to
standard theistic supernatural mystical
magical explanations that have been with
us since the beginning of time you can't
possibly understand the mind of god you
are a pathetic human you are like a
cockroach compared to the alien
intelligence out there the artificial
general super intelligence that is yet
to come or god of monotheism in all
these cases you can't understand the
ultimate nature of reality so anyone
even with their scientific rationalist
mindset who comes to you to say there is
something there that cannot be
understood by human beings is doing the
same thing as the priest the rabbi the
monk and so on and so forth who is
saying some things are just beyond the
can of people to ever fully appreciate
and understand and i think that's fine
allow them to believe that so long as
they're not getting in the way of
everyone else who's actually trying to
come to a rational realistic
understanding of reality okay we have
optimism here and our optimism says
problems are soluble and the hard stuff
we have to deal with as human beings the
things that cause suffering the evils in
the world
can be overcome because they're just a
matter of a lack of knowledge so please
step aside people who think that certain
problems are not soluble who think that
our capacity for understanding the world
is inherently limited those people can
step aside and allow the rest of us to
go forward into understanding reality
because we think it's inherently
unlimited and so there's no barriers
before us let's keep going and david
writes quote it is no anomaly brought
about by the accidental properties of
human sense organs but is a fundamental
property of the multiverse at large
and the fact that the multiverse has
this property what property this
property that the universe is
comprehensible that we are in and we can
comprehend the universe far from being a
minor embarrassment for realism and
science is essential for both it is the
very property that makes science
possible it is not something that we
would rather do without it is something
that we literally could not do without
these may seem rather lofty claims to
make on behalf of flight simulators and
video games
but it is the phenomenon of virtual
reality in general that occupies a
central place in the scheme of things
not any particular virtual reality
generator
so i want to consider virtual reality in
as general a way as possible
what if any are its ultimate limits what
sorts of environment can in principle be
artificially rendered and with what
accuracy
by in principle i mean ignoring
transient limitations of technology but
taking into account all limitations that
may be imposed by the principles of
logic and physics the way i have defined
it a virtual reality generator is a
machine that gives the user experiences
of some real or imagined environment
such as an aircraft which is or seems to
be outside the user's mind let me call
those external experiences external
experiences are to be contrasted with
internal experiences such as one's
nervousness when making one's first solo
landing or one surprise at the sudden
appearance of a thunderstorm out of a
clear blue sky a virtual reality
generator indirectly causes the user to
have internal experiences as well as
external ones but it cannot be
programmed to render a specific internal
experience for example a pilot who makes
roughly the same flight twice in the
simulator will have roughly the same
external experiences on both occasions
but on the second occasion we'll
probably be less surprised when the
thunderstorm appears of course on the
second occasion the pilot would probably
also react differently to the appearance
of the thunderstorm and that would make
the subsequent external experiences
quite different too but the point is
that although one can program the
machine to make a thunderstorm appear in
the pilot's field of view whenever one
likes one cannot program it to make the
pilot think whatever one likes in
response
end quote
and here david goes on to consider
virtual reality that intervenes in the
mind directly
you know drugs are one such thing but
they're sort of low resolution
approximations to what we would imagine
could be done in the future with
individual electrodes going into
individual neurons or perhaps getting
right into the synapse and fiddling with
the neurotransmitters directly if you
can do that with some level of precision
without limit you know presumably an
interface of the future would be able to
replicate simulate interfere with
whatever you want to do with the
individual neurotransmitters with the
chemicals themselves
therefore you'd be able to simulate
literally any experience that a brain
could possibly conjure for the mind of a
person
nowhere near there yet a glass of wine
is obviously going to alter your
experience of reality but it is a very
crude method in which to alter one's
mood or change one's experience of the
sensations and the data that's coming
into their brain and then interpreted by
their mind okay so i'm skipping a bit
and picking it up where david writes
another type of experience which
certainly cannot be artificially
rendered is a logically impossible one
i have said that a flight simulator can
create the experience of a physically
impossible flight through a mountain but
nothing can create the experience of
factorizing the number 181 because that
is logically impossible 181 is a prime
number
believing that one has factorized 181 is
a logically possible experience but an
internal one and so also outside the
scope of virtual reality another
logically impossible experience is
unconsciousness for when one is
unconscious one is by definition not
experiencing anything not experiencing
anything is quite different from
experiencing a total lack of sensations
sensory isolation which is of course a
physically possible environment having
excluded logically impossible
experiences and internal experiences we
are left with the vast class of
logically possible external experiences
experiences of environments which are
logically possible but may or may not be
physically possible
something is physically possible if it
is not forbidden by the laws of physics
in this book i shall assume that the
laws of physics include an as yet
unknown rule determining the initial
state or other supplementary data
necessary to give in principle a
complete description of the multiverse
otherwise these data would be a set of
intrinsically inexplicable facts in that
case an environment is physically
possible if and only if it actually
exists somewhere in the multiverse i.e
in some universe or universes something
is physically impossible if it does not
happen anywhere in the multiverse
pausing near my reflection and
importantly my ruminations on this so
following the
science of canon can't
following constructor theory and
following what we know about quantum
theory given the everettian
so-called interpretation unitary quantum
theory it's true that anything that can
possibly happen is going to happen
somewhere in the multiverse but that
does not mean
that all things that happen are
necessarily caused or represented
in equal measure throughout the
multiverse as a silly example every
single time the lottery in your country
is run
and you buy a ticket there is a possible
sequence of universes where you are the
winner week upon week upon week upon
week because it's physically possible
it's not ruled out by the laws of
quantum theory and so therefore it's
going to happen somewhere but each time
you win the lottery the measure of
universes where you subsequently
continue to win gets ever thinner and
thinner and thinner there is a smaller
and smaller measure of universes where
that happens you shouldn't expect it to
happen it may very well happen somewhere
in physical reality in the multiverse
but these long chains of coincidences
they are not expected to continue and
some of those chains of coincidences
can't be said to be causal you go to my
multiverse series on that but what we're
basically saying here is the classic
harry potter universe where a bespeckled
boy somewhere in the multiverse every
time he holds a loft a stick his wand
and says the magic words abracadabra or
whatever they're saying harry potter a
lightening bolt a spark of electricity
shoots out from the wand
now that's not because he says the magic
words and it may have nothing whatever
to do
with either the perspective boy or with
the wooden stick that he's holding these
are just chains of coincidences it's not
causal it's not that the boy is causing
the magic wand to be magic and to
release lightning from the tip of the
wand
these are just coincidental things
yet it appears causal to everyone in
that universe and so people in that
universe might believe come to think
that the bespeckled boy is
in fact magical but also in every single
one of those universes it should be
expected that the very next time he says
the magic words that no spark does
happen and the overworld majority of
universes where he does tried it fails
but there is a sliver of universes where
it continues to happen okay all of that
is fine there the po the thing here is
that there's a difference between
something being physically possible in
the universe actually happening and
something occurring in our world our
part of the multiverse if you like
where it actually forms a
causal explanation of what's going on
and that usually comes down to the
creation of knowledge
somewhere in the multiverse human beings
have figured out
how to be effectively immortal you know
not die of sickness maybe they still
don't have accidents but they've cured
all illnesses now that part of the
multiverse is going to continue to grow
presumably the proportion of universes
will continue to increase because it's
physically possible
and it's in very important knowledge
useful information
which will grow over time because
knowledge by its very nature is useful
information that's very useful people
want to solve the problem of
why human beings keep on getting ill
sick and dying and if we can figure out
how to solve this then so will our
counterparts in other universes and if
they already have we will too eventually
if there's no physical law standing in
the way of effective immortality
then this is a possible thing that will
grow
in terms of how much of the multiverse
it begins to occupy as david has written
these papers the structure of the
multiverse is determined by information
flow and so essentially what happens
into the distant future is a result of
the knowledge creation that people
undertake in our universe and in
universes right beside ours so to speak
and so in our part of the universe where
we're creating knowledge that knowledge
is of course possible and in the case of
immortality or any other important issue
that we would like to find the solution
for we'd like to find immortality we'd
like to find
fusion power how to do it here safely on
earth perhaps even something more
efficient than fusion power who knows
what if it's possible then we will find
it and that will propagate throughout
the multiverse and become an
increasingly more important causal
reason why other things happen in the
multiverse now as compared to that other
sequence of possible things the harry
potter universe is where i just
mentioned where it would become an
increasingly smaller proportion of the
multiverse over time where magic appears
to have worked but never actually did
work okay but knowledge creation actual
knowledge creation is a cause of the way
in which the multiverse evolves over
time because that's useful information
that continues to remain instantiated in
the universe continues to get itself
copied because it's solving a particular
problem so that's how that comes to bear
all on this let's continue david ryan's
i define the repertoire of a virtual
reality generator as the set of real or
imaginary environments that the
generator can be programmed to give the
user the experience of
my question about the ultimate limits of
virtual reality can be stated like this
what constraints if any do the laws of
physics impose on the repertoires of
virtual reality generators and in this
section david goes on to consider the
the the resolution the the the limit of
precision of sensors
now these days as he mentions and i'm
not going to read this part
audio equipment speakers high fidelity
speakers and stuff it routinely
replicate precisely the sounds of
reality you know i've got cats i play my
cats because they are entertained by it
these sounds and images of birds on a
screen now the sounds even to me are
completely indistinguishable from the
real sounds that birds make so
they are perfectly replicating reality
to me if i'm immersed in the sound
escape of artificial bird sounds it may
as well be real bird sounds repeat for
just about anything else i mean my ears
are unable to distinguish at this point
between reality and the audible
reproduction now there is a difference i
would say with music sometimes just
because who knows what i i'm not a
musician i can't explain this in
technical terms but certainly if you're
at a concert there is a different
experience and the sound there is
different to what a recorded concert is
i don't think they've got that quite
right yet for reasons maybe listeners
can tell me with screens with the visual
stuff we're just about there aren't we
it's just about the case that a
4k or 8k
16k i think we're getting to high
resolution screen as of 2022 that's
going to date us someone's going to be
listening to this in 2024 2026 and say
we've got much better screens now anyway
those screens are going to be as high
resolution as a window you're going to
be able to look at the screen and be
unable to tell the difference between
the screen and actual
reality so we're there with sound with
air with vision what about other stuff
one of the really interesting ones
neither sight nor sound is smell um and
one of the pioneers of perhaps the
pioneer of virtual reality as we
experience it now in
games and so forth connected up to our
computers is geron lenier who i've
mentioned before on the podcast great
iconoclastic thinker another person by
the way who apparently didn't complete
high school i don't think and not much
university either but has contributed to
many different fields
to mathematics to physics and of course
to
technology now he wrote a book which i
recommend to everyone you are not a
gadget wonderful book again about the
deep mystery of what it is to be a human
being i've often said that jeroen lanier
is my favorite optimistic pessimist
he's a bit of a pessimist about various
matters but
somehow comes around to this positive
wonderfully positive vision of human
beings and even a positive vision of
economics which is rare today most other
people are
tending the collectivist
direction he tends more into the free
trade free markets direction
but there's still this sort of pessimism
about technology now maybe he's right
and to a certain extent about that he's
not a great fan of social media that's
taking me far a feel of what i wanted to
say back in his first book you are not a
gadget he writes about this question
about how to have
smell
in virtual reality can we have smell in
the same way that we have virtual
reality sound and virtual reality vision
what would goggles with um
that stimulate the olfactory system be
like let me just read a section from you
are not a gadget paint 184 if you happen
to have the book and he writes so jaron
writes quote for 20 years or so i gave a
lecture introducing the fundamentals of
virtual reality i'd review the basics of
vision and hearing as well as of touch
and taste at the end the questions would
begin and one of the first ones was
usually about smell will we have smells
in virtual reality anytime soon
maybe but probably just a few odors are
fundamentally different from images or
sounds the latter can be broken down
into primary components that are
relatively straightforward for computers
and the brain to process
the visible colors are merely words for
different wavelengths of light every
sound wave is actually composed of
numerous sine waves each of which can be
easily described mathematically
each one is like a particular size of
bump in the corduroy roads of my
childhood in other words both colors and
sounds can be described with just a few
numbers a wide spectrum of colors and
tones is described by the interpolations
between those numbers the human retina
need be sensitive to only a few
wavelengths or colors in order for our
brains to process all the intermediate
ones computer graphics work similarly a
screen of pixels each capable of
reproducing red green or blue can
produce approximately all the colors
that the human eye can see a music
synthesizer can be thought of as
generating a lot of sine waves then
layering them to create an array of
sounds odours are completely different
as is the brain's method of sensing them
deep in the nasal passage shrouded by a
mucous membrane sits a patch of tissue
the olfactory epithelium studded with
neurons that detect chemicals each of
these neurons has cup shaped proteins
called olfactory receptors when a
particular molecule happens to fall into
a matching receptor a neural signal is
triggered that is transmitted to the
brain as an odor a molecule too large to
fit into one of the receptors has no
odour the number of distinct odours is
limited only by the number of olfactory
receptors capable of interacting with
them linda buck of the fred hutchinson
cancer research center and richard axel
of columbia university winners of the
2004 nobel prize in physiology or
medicine have found that the human nose
contains about 1 000 different types of
olfactory neurons each type able to
detect a particular set of chemicals
this adds up to a profound difference in
the underlying structure of the senses a
difference that gives rise to compelling
questions about the way we think and
perhaps even about the origins of
language there is no way to interpolate
between two smell molecules true odours
can be mixed together to form millions
of cents but the world's smells can't be
broken down into just a few numbers on a
gradient there is no smell pixel think
of it this way colors and sounds can be
measured with rulers but odours must be
looked up in a dictionary that's a shame
from the point of view of a virtual
reality technologist there are thousands
of fundamental odors far more than the
handful of primary colours perhaps
someday we will be able to wire up a
person's brain in order to create the
illusion of smell but it would take a
lot of wires to address all those
entries in the mental smell dictionary
then again the brain must have some way
of organizing all those odors maybe at
some level smells do fit into a pattern
maybe there's a smell pixel after all
okay end quote and then geron goes on
writing in this vein talking more about
small but it's very interesting isn't it
so fundamentally of a different kind so
while you have wavelengths effectively
for light and for sound no such
wavelength exists for smell instead as
he says there it's a dictionary that you
have to look up particular things but
david's not so much talking about that
kind of limitation as geron admits there
and as david agrees if you could just
get into the individual neurons problem
solved say problem solved of course in
principle is physically possible in
practice at the moment we don't have
much of a clue about how to do this at
all david actually writes in the very
next section on this so i'll just read
the section that david writes about this
after he explains how virtual reality
with vision and hearing would work he
says but what about the other senses
quote is it obvious that it is
physically possible to build a
general-purpose chemical factory that
can produce any specified combination of
millions of different odoriferous
chemicals at a moment's notice or
machine which inserted into a gourmand's
mouth can assume the taste and texture
of any possible dish to say nothing of
creating the hunger and thirst that
precede the meal and the physical
satisfaction that follows it end quote
so yes we've got
difficulties here with these other kinds
of senses now again those practical
diffidies pose no barrier to what is
physically possible and
if you're watching this on youtube i'm
putting up the
slide of the image that appears in the
book and it's a table a tag
table 5.1 a classification of
experiences with examples of each
virtual reality is concerned with the
generation of logically possible
external experiences which are only in
the top left
region
of the table so for people listening
we've got this table here of both
external and internal experiences and
the logically possible experiences and
logically impossible experiences so the
ones that are ruled out that no
virtual reality
generator can possibly generate produce
would be the experience of factorizing a
prime number that's an external
experience which is logically impossible
and unconsciousness would be an internal
so it's logically possible to be proud
of one's piloting abilities but that's
not something that a virtual reality
generator could do because the virtual
reality generator we're talking about
isn't actually going directly into your
mind to fiddle with your capacity to
have a particular thought or a
particular idea so all of what a virtual
reality
generator is limited to
things that are external and physically
possible and physically impossible as
well so for example piloting an aircraft
is physically possible it's an external
experience but also piloting an aircraft
such that it flies faster than the speed
of light is also something a virtual
reality generator could do
physically impossible but it could give
you that experience or at least
represent that experience david's about
to explain a little bit more on that
point now the before we get there the
next part is about some of the practical
difficulties not merely difficulties
perhaps impossibilities of generating
certain experiences or sensations
one of which is to do with gravity now
now weightlessness is one such now you
can fiddle with someone's experience of
gravity in certain ways i know i had
this back when i was a a child and i
went to disneyland for i think only the
second time and they had a
star wars ride and you went on this ride
and of course it was a
it was a one of the early forms of
virtual reality and you and the other
people on the ride all you were doing
was staring at a screen and on the
screen in front of you and you were also
listening to the sounds on the screen in
front of you was where you were going on
the ride now if it wanted to give you
the experience of accelerating then of
course the simulator thing just like a
flight simulator used hydraulics to
pitch the entire thing upwards and if it
wanted to give you the experience of
quickly decelerating then it pitched the
thing downwards towards the ground and
this takes advantage of something called
the equivalence principle now the
equivalence principle comes from
general relativity it's an important
idea where if you're listening to this
on planet earth and you're sitting down
then the
force of gravity upon you i shouldn't
say force the the strength of the
gravity and we can measure strength the
strength of gravity in various different
ways one way is to talk about the
acceleration due to gravity the number
that's normally used is 9.8 ish now the
units can be newtons per kilogram but
equivalently we can talk about
9.8 meters per second squared okay
that's the number that's the value of
gravity if there was such a thing as the
surface of jupiter the value would be
higher you would feel heavier and if you
went to the moon the value is about
one-fifth of what it is here on earth
and so therefore you feel lighter now
the equivalence principle basically says
this
that if the value here on the surface of
earth is 9.8 meters per second squared
when you're just sitting there in a
chair on the surface of the earth then
if you go into deep space somewhere or
other where you are
weightless so to speak far from any
gravitational body
then if you wanted to replicate what it
was like on earth all you would need to
do would be to accelerate at the rate of
9.8 meters per second squared so you
could stick yourself in a box and if you
were unable to see outside if it was a
solid metal box
then there would be no experiment that
you could do inside the box to tell the
difference between whether you're in a
box in deep space accelerating at 9.8
meters per second squared or on the
surface of the earth completely
stationary but subject to the
gravitational field of the earth of 9.8
meters per second squared that's the
equivalence principle in other words
accelerations
and gravitational fields are equivalent
in that way even though we can tell by
looking at them that the the cause of
the two different things is somewhat
different now what's that got to do with
anything at all well if you want to
simulate literal weightlessness here on
earth with a virtual reality machine
you've got some problems to overcome and
perhaps those problems are impossibly
high in terms of even in principle being
able to overcome on earth if an
astronaut wants to train in
weightlessness then what they have to do
is to get into an airplane and the
aeroplane follows a parabolic path david
explains this and the descent of the
parabolic path can be such that you can
experience literal weightlessness
there's no longer a gravitational field
acting upon your body and so you feel
weightless you are weightless you will
not register upon a scale we also call
that free fall in other words the best
that a flight simulator on earth could
do if it wants to give you that
sensation would be aside from getting
directly into your brain of course if it
was able to
somehow get directly into your brain
would be on virtual reality then
then it could give you the sensation of
weightlessness however the only other
way would be to put the flight simulator
itself into free fall
which obviously means you'd want the
flight simulator at high altitude and
then you're not simulating
weightlessness you are weightless but
how to simulate free fall on the ground
david asks and let me just read the
section he says how to simulate it well
quote not easily for the laws of physics
get in the way known physics provides no
way other than free fall even in
principle of removing an object's weight
the only way of putting a flight
simulator into freefall while it remains
stationary on the surface of the earth
would be somehow to suspend a massive
body such as another planet of similar
mass or a black hole above it even if
this were possible remember we are
concerned here not with immediate
practicality but with what the laws of
physics do or do not permit a real
aircraft could also produce
frequent complex changes in the
magnitude and direction of the
occupant's weight by maneuvering or
switching its engines on and off to
simulate these changes the massive body
would have to be moved around just as
frequently and it seems likely that the
speed of light if nothing else would
impose
an absolute limit on how fast this could
be done and then david goes on to
explain the
approximations that we use you know
going underwater for example gives you
an approximation but it's a crude
approximation to weightlessness so we
can ignore those and he ends up
concluding by saying or asking quote but
could one ever render the experience
perfectly in a flight simulator that
remained firmly on the ground if not
then there would be an absolute limit on
the fidelity with which flying
experiences can ever be rendered
artificially to distinguish between a
real aircraft and a simulation
a pilot would only have to fly it in
freefall trajectory and not see where
the weightlessness occurred or not and
then skipping a little david goes on to
say weightlessness and all other
sensations can in principle be rendered
artificially eventually it will become
possible to bypass the sense organs
altogether and directly stimulate the
nerves that lead from them to the brain
so we do not need general purpose
chemical factories or impossible
artificial gravity machines when we have
understood the olfactory organs well
enough to crack the code in which they
send signals to the brain when they
detect scents a computer with suitable
connections to the relevant nerves could
send the brain the same signals then the
brain could experience the sense without
the corresponding chemicals ever having
existed similarly the brain could
experience the authentic sensation of
weightlessness even under normal gravity
and of course no televisions or
headphones would be needed either thus
david goes on to say the laws of physics
impose no limit on the range and
accuracy of image generators there is no
possible sensation or sequence of
sensations that human beings are capable
of experiencing that could not in
principle be rendered artificially thus
the laws of physics impose no limits on
the range and accuracy of image
generators one day as a generalization
of movies there will be what aldous
huxley in brave new world called feelies
movies for all the senses one will be
able to feel the rocking of a boat
beneath one's feet hear the waves and
smell the sea see the changing colours
of the sunset on the horizon and feel
the wind in one's hair
whether or not one has any hair or
without leaving dry land or venturing
out of doors not only that fearless will
just as easily be able to depict scenes
that have never existed and never could
exist or they could play the equivalent
of music beautiful abstract combinations
of sensations composed to delight the
senses that every possible sensation can
be artificially rendered as one thing
that it will one day be possible once
and for all to build a single machine
that can render any possible sensation
calls for something extra universality a
feeling machine with that capability
would be a universal image generator
okay then david goes on to talk about
the possibility of creating these
universal image generators and so i'm
skipping a bit there again we go into
the
limits of technology the the the
parochial limits of technology at any
given time how good our audio
reproduction happens to be
so skipping that picking it up where
david writes quote if an image generator
is playing a recording taken from life
its accuracy may be defined as the
closeness of the rendered images to the
ones that a person in the original
situation would have perceived more
generally if the generator is rendering
artificially designed images such as a
cartoon or music played from a written
composition the accuracy is the
closeness of the rendered images to the
intended ones by closeness remain
closeness as perceived by the user if
the rendering is so close has to be
indistinguishable by the user from what
is intended then we call it perfectly
accurate so a rendering that is
perfectly accurate for one user may
contain inaccuracies that are
perceptible to a user with sharper
sensors or with additional senses pause
down my reflection and one might also
add and more knowledge as well i can
certainly imagine
listening to a piece of music that i
think is a perfect representation a
perfect rendering of a previous piece
but not knowing that much about music i
imagine someone else who has better
knowledge of music even if they don't
have sharper senses than me would be
able to tell the difference okay i'm
skipping a bit david goes into uh
what a universal image generator amounts
to you know this is the same as a
computer all all actual computers we
call them universal computers but of
course all actual computers to
uh approximations to universal computers
to be a truly universal computer you
need an infinite amount of memory uh in
order to you know literally any possible
computation that is possible well that
includes computations that might last
for the you know the length of the
universe so therefore you need a lot of
you know memory in order to do that the
same is true for this universal image
generator would need uh something it's
an amount of memory that allows it to
play a recording of unlimited duration
as david says and so would need to uh be
able to maintain itself as it goes along
as well so i'm skipping bits here
and i'll pick it up where david writes
quote the human mind affects the body
and the outside world by emitting nerve
impulses therefore a virtual reality
generator can in principle obtain all
the information it needs about what the
user is doing by intercepting the nerve
signals coming from the user's brain
those signals which would have gone to
the user's body can instead be
transmitted to a computer and decoded to
determine exactly how the user's body
would have moved the signals sent back
to the brain by the computer can be the
same as those that would have been sent
by the body if it were in the specified
environment if the specification called
for it
the simulated body could also react
differently from the real one for
example to enable it to survive in
simulations of environments that would
kill a real human body or to simulate
malfunctions of the body i'd better
admit here that it is probably too great
an idealization to say the human mind
interacts with the outside world only by
emitting and receiving nerve impulses
there are chemical messages passing in
both directions as well i am assuming
that in principle those messages could
also be intercepted and replaced at some
point between the brain and the rest of
the body thus the user would lie
motionless connected to the computer but
having the experience of interacting
fully with the simulated world in effect
living there okay pausing there my
reflection this is as david goes on to
say basically talked about in descartes
meditations with the demon the demon is
intercepting your senses your brain
whatever and perhaps make deceiving you
about the real nature of the world this
exactly the same thing is true in the
matrix the movie by the wachowski
brothers that the matrix movie the
series of movies it's where
human beings might be laying in pods and
their their nervous system has a cable
attached to it which intercepts these
signals going to and from the brain to
make you think that you're experiencing
a full 3d reality world but in fact you
are laying in a pod somewhere as the
fuel source or the energy source for a
great nefarious computer
same idea so skipping lots more and i'm
just picking it up where david says
quote i do not want to understate the
practical problems involved in
intercepting all the nerve signals
passing into and out of the human brain
and in cracking the various codes
involved but this is a finite set of
problems that we shall have to solve
once only after that the focus of
virtual reality technology will shift
once and for all to the computer to the
problem of programming it to render
various environments what environments
we shall be able to render will no
longer depend on what sensors and image
generators we can build but only on what
environments we can specify specifying
an environment will mean supplying a
program for the computer which is the
heart of the virtual reality generator
end quote then david goes on to say how
a virtual reality generator unlike an
image generator virtual reality
generator responds to the user's
movements and so on inside that
environment what the user chooses to do
and by way of further exploring this
idea
david talks about playing tennis and so
he says quote the number of possible
tennis games that can be played in a
single environment that is rendered by a
single program is very large consider a
rendering of the centre court at
wimbledon from the point of view of a
player suppose very conservatively that
in each second of the game the player
can move in one of two perceptibly
different ways perceptibly that is to
the player then after two seconds there
are four possible games after three
seconds eight possible games and so on
after about four minutes the number of
possible games that are perceptibly
different from one another exceeds the
number of atoms in the universe and it
continues to rise exponentially for a
program to render that one environment
accurately it must be capable of
responding in any one of those myriad
perceptibly different ways depending
upon how the player chooses to behave if
two programs respond in the same way to
every possible action by the user then
they render the same environment if they
would respond perceptibly different to
even one possible action they render
different environments that remains so
even if the user never happens to
perform the action that shows up the
difference
the environment a program renders for a
given type of user with a given
connecting cable is a logical property
of the program independent of whether
the program is ever executed a rendered
environment is accurate insofar as it
would respond in the intended way to
every possible action of the user thus
its accuracy depends not only on
experiences which users of it actually
have
but also on experiences they do not have
but would have had if they had chosen to
behave differently during the rendering
this may sound paradoxical but as i have
said it is a straightforward consequence
of the fact that virtual reality is
like reality itself interactive this
gives rise to an important difference
between image generation and virtual
reality generation the accuracy of an
image generator's rendering can in
principle be experienced
measured and certified by the user but
the accuracy of a virtual reality
rendering never can be
for example if you are a music lover and
you know a particular piece well enough
you can listen to a performance of it
and confirm that it is a perfectly
accurate rendering in principle down to
the last note phrasing dynamics and all
but if you are a tennis fan who knows
wimbledon center caught perfectly you
can never confirm that a purported
rendering of it is accurate even if you
are free to explore the rendered centre
court for however long you like and to
kick it in whatever way you like and
even if you have equal access to the
real centre court for comparison you
cannot ever certify that the program
does indeed render the real location for
you can never know what would have
happened if only you had explored a
little more or looked over your shoulder
at the right moment perhaps if you had
sat on the rendered umpire's chair and
shouted fault a nuclear submarine would
have surfaced through the grass and
torpedoed the scoreboard
end quote so what's david saying there
well obviously that wouldn't happen on
the real cinder court
so if it happened in the rendered center
court
then center court at wimbledon you know
if you yell fault in the umpire chair
and the nuclear submarine rises then
clearly it's not an accurate rendering
of the actual center court where that
thing would not have happened okay let's
keep going quote on the other hand
if you find even one difference between
the rendering and the intended
environment you can immediately certify
that the rendering is inaccurate unless
that is the rendered environment has
some intentionally unpredictable
features for example a roulette wheel is
designed to be unpredictable
if we make a film of roulette being
played in a casino that film may be said
to be accurate if the numbers that are
shown coming up in the film are the same
numbers that actually come up when the
film was made the film will show the
same numbers every time it is played it
is totally predictable so an accurate
image of an unpredictable environment
must be predictable but what does it
mean for a virtual reality rendering of
a roulette wheel to be accurate as
before it means that a user should not
find it perceptibly different from the
original but this implies that the
rendering must not behave identically to
the original if it did either it or the
original could be used to predict the
other's behavior and then neither would
be unpredictable nor must it behave the
same way every time it is run a
perfectly rendered roulette wheel must
be just as usable for gambling as a real
one therefore it must be just as
unpredictable also it must be just as
fair that is all the numbers must come
up purely randomly with equal
probabilities how do we recognize
unpredictable environments and how do we
confirm purportedly random numbers are
distributed fairly well we check whether
a rendering of a roulette wheel meets
its specifications in the same way that
we check whether the real thing does by
kicking spinning it and seeing whether
it responds as advertised we make a
large number of similar observations and
perform statistical tests on these
outcomes again however many tests we
carry out we cannot certify that the
rendering is accurate or even that it is
probably accurate for however randomly
the numbers seem to come up they may
nevertheless fall into a secret pattern
that would allow a user in the know to
predict them or perhaps if we had asked
out loud the date of the battle of
waterloo
the next two numbers that came up would
invariably show that date 18 15. on the
other hand if the sequence that comes up
looks unfair we cannot know for sure
that it is but we might be able to say
that the rendering is probably
inaccurate for example if zero came up
on our rendered roulette wheel on ten
consecutive spins we should conclude
that we probably do not have an accurate
rendering of a fair roulette wheel pause
there my reflection
you have to read all of this
in concert with perhaps my
recent episodes on probability including
the chapter on uh probability from
stephen pinker's book rationality and
more importantly perhaps the one before
that where i go through david's talk on
probability all of this that same
meaning is conveyed what dave david says
here conveys precisely the same meaning
as i think he would otherwise phrase
things now because
his take is that probability is not a a
genuine thing it's a scam but there's a
better way to talk about these things in
the same way so the roulette wheel a
fair roulette wheel is subjectively
unpredictable we can't predict where
it's going to go next because of
the quantum world the quantum laws of
physics are the things that mean that
from our vantage point we just don't
know
what number is going to come up next but
that's not to say it is literally random
literally random and he probably
wouldn't say the word probably so often
i don't know what we would say here is
where he says let me just read it again
for example he says quote for example if
zero came up on our rendered roulette
wheel on ten consecutive spins we should
conclude that we probably do not have an
accurate rendering of a fair roulette
wheel
end quote
i would say the one phrasing that we
could use instead of using word probably
there is if you have ten consecutive
zeros coming up on a roulette wheel a
bad explanation is that that was just
due to chance
one should instead hedge for have the
conjecture that
there's been a stitch up that it's a put
up job that someone is cheating and so
on and so forth whatever way you want to
say this
what isn't the case is that
the best explanation is that's not a
fair roulette wheel
we don't have to have any probably about
it it's not a fair roulette wheel would
be our working hypothesis until such
time as someone can show us then in fact
it is a fair rule at will however they
go about doing that let's get going
david writes quote when discussing image
generators i said that the accuracy of a
rendered image depends upon the
sharpness and other attributes of the
user's senses with virtual reality that
is the least of our problems certainly a
virtual reality generator that renders a
given environment perfectly for humans
will not do so for dolphins or
extraterrestrials to render a given
environment for a user with given types
of sense organs a virtual reality
generator must be physically adapted to
such sense organs and its computer must
be programmed with their characteristics
end quote yes so that's interesting so
we have particular range of sensors and
then other organisms will have subtly
different
range of sensors so it's no good having
a virtual reality generator that is
sending us the sensation of seeing
ultraviolet or infrared radiation we
can't see those things so the whole
concept of accuracy here is a virtual
reality rendering is accurate for a
particular user and if the particular
user can't tell the difference between
that thing and the
real thing then it's accurate as david
goes on to say quote
this discussion of accuracy and virtual
reality mirrors the relationship between
theory and experiment in science there
too it is possible to confirm
experimentally that a general theory is
false but never that it is true and
there too a short-sighted view of
science is that it is all about
predicting our sense impressions the
correct view is that while sense
impressions always play a role what
science is about is understanding the
whole of reality of which only an
infinitesimal proportion is ever
experienced pause down my reflection
there we go again
there we have the beginning of infinity
prefaced in or a deep theme of the
beginning infinity prefaced in here the
fabric of reality again he says what
science is about
is understanding the whole of reality
understanding so there we get
explanations an explanation allows you
to understand reality
and
we only ever experience an infinitesimal
proportion of it so this small amount of
data that we are able to gather that's
the stuff that gives us our problems or
allows us to
distinguish between the theories we
already guess and those theories can be
about
all reality wonderful david goes on to
say the program in a virtual reality
generator embodies a general predictive
theory of the behavior of the rendered
environment the other components deal
with keeping track of what the user is
doing and with the encoding and decoding
of sensory data these as i have said are
relatively trivial functions thus if the
environment is physically possible
rendering it is essentially equivalent
to finding rules for predicting the
outcome of every experiment that could
be performed in that environment because
of the way in which scientific knowledge
is created ever more accurate predictive
rules can be discovered only through
ever better explanatory theories
so accurately rendering a physically
possible environment depends on
understanding its physics the converse
is also true discovering the physics of
an environment depends upon creating a
virtual reality rendering of it
normally one would say that scientific
theories only describe and explain
physical objects and processes but do
not render them for example an
explanation of eclipses of the sun can
be printed in a book a computer can be
programmed with astronomical data and
physical laws to predict an eclipse and
to print out a description of it but
rendering the eclipse in virtual reality
would require both further programming
and further hardware however those are
already present in our brains the words
and numbers printed by the computer
amount to descriptions of an eclipse
only because someone knows the meanings
of those symbols that is the symbols
evoke in the reader's mind some sort of
likeness of some predicted effect of the
eclipse against which the real
appearance of that effect will be tested
moreover the likeness that is evoked is
interactive one can observe an eclipse
in many ways with the naked eye or by
photography or using various scientific
instruments from some positions on earth
one will see a total eclipse of the sun
from other positions a partial eclipse
and from anywhere else no eclipse at all
in each case an observer will experience
different images any of which can be
predicted by the theory what the
computer's description evokes in the
reader's mind is not just a single image
or a sequence of images but a general
method of creating many different images
corresponding to the many ways in which
the reader may contemplate making
observations in other words it is a
virtual reality rendering thus in a
broad enough sense taking into account
the processes that must take place
inside the scientists mind science and
the virtual reality rendering of
physically possible environments are two
terms denoting the same activity pausing
there my reflection
there's a depth to that that we can't
just brush aside
that science and the virtual reality
rendering of physical reality physically
possible environments are two terms
denoting the same activity science this
capacity to explain the universe is a
virtual reality rendering inside of our
minds of what's going on in physical
reality that's what a human's mind is
doing what a scientist's mind is doing
when they explain the world they are
rendering
physical reality a version of physical
reality
to some degree of fertility to some
degree of accuracy
inside of their own minds
and this gets to the heart of this idea
of humans as universal explainers yet of
course
i think to be discovered by david yet
that doesn't come until between here and
the beginning of infinity but we're
getting hints of it there aren't we
we're really getting hints of it there
david goes on to talk about virtual
reality machines that render physically
impossible environments one of which is
of course you know flying an airplane
faster than the speed of light that is
something that a virtual reality
generator can do it can render that
environment now
who cares about that well let's read
what david has to say about these
reflections on this idea of
physically impossible environments being
rendered in virtual reality
consider a virtual reality generator in
the act of rendering a physically
impossible environment it might be a
flight simulator running a program that
calculates the view from the cockpit of
an aircraft that can fly faster than
light the flight simulator is rendering
that environment but in addition the
flight simulator is itself the
environment that the user is
experiencing in the sense that it is a
physical object surrounding the user let
us consider this environment clearly it
is a physically possible environment is
it a renderable environment of course in
fact it is exceptionally easy to render
one simply uses a second flight
simulator of the same design running the
identical program under those
circumstances the second flight
simulator can be thought of as rendering
either the physically impossible
aircraft or a physically possible
environment namely the first flight
simulator similarly the first flight
simulator could be regarded as rendering
a physically possible environment namely
the second flight simulator if we assume
that any virtual reality generator that
can in principle be built canon
principle be built again then it follows
that every virtual reality generator
running any program in its repertoire is
rendering some physically possible
environment it's maybe rendering other
things as well including physically
impossible environments but in
particular there is always some
physically possible environment that it
is rendering so which physically
impossible environments can be rendered
in virtual reality precisely those that
are not perceptibly different from
physically possible environments
therefore the connection between the
physical world and the worlds that are
renderable in virtual reality is far
closer than it looks we think of some
virtual reality renderings as depicting
fact and others as depicting fiction but
the fiction is always an interpretation
in the mind of the beholder there is no
such thing as a virtual reality
environment that the user would be
compelled to interpret as physically
impossible okay then david goes on to
talk about how virtual reality could be
used to
render
environments where the laws of physics
are different so in theory sort of
physically impossible environments
however the mere fact that some virtual
reality machine can render that
environment makes it a physically
possible environment because look the
virtual reality machine is rendering
that environment so therefore it's
physically possible to render the
environment so you're having an
experience which is physically possible
not physically impossible
in a sense and david talks about how
imagination is a straightforward form of
virtual reality and goes on to say quote
i'll pick it up where he starts to say
quote
we realist take the view that reality is
out there objective physical and
independent of what we believe about it
but we never experience that reality
directly every last scrap of our
external experiences of virtual reality
and every last scrap of our knowledge
including our knowledge of the
non-physical worlds of logic mathematics
and philosophy and of imagination
fiction art and fantasy is encoded in
the form of programs for the rendering
of those worlds on our brain's own
virtual reality generator
so it is not just science reasoning
about the physical world that involves
virtual reality or reasoning or thinking
and all external experience are forms of
virtual reality these things are
physical processes which so far have
been observed in only one place in the
universe namely the vicinity of the
planet earth we shall see in chapter 8
that all living processes involve
virtual reality too but human beings in
particular have a special relationship
with it biologically speaking the
virtual reality rendering of their
environment is the characteristic means
by which human beings survive in other
words it is the reason why human beings
exist the ecological niche that human
beings occupy depends on virtual reality
as directly and as absolutely as the
ecological niche that koala bears occupy
depends on eucalyptus leaves
end quote end of the chapter and there
once again we have a hint
a a a window into the beginning of
infinity because
there the characteristic means by which
human beings survive what is it a
virtual reality rendering of their
environment and what is that
an understanding of
the the physics of the environment of
all of everything not just the physics
but of of well the virtual reality
rendering of their environment is the
explanations of their environment the
explanations of the physical world and
not just the physical world but the
other parts the other aspects of the
world the social world in which you
occupy that you occupy the philosophical
world that you occupy the traditions and
the culture that you occupy if that is
being rendered inside of your mind the
understanding that you have inside of
your mind the set of explanations that
forms your world view is essentially a
virtual reality rendering of your
environment
which is
connecting this book the fabric of
reality to the beginning affinity david
says there again koala bears i think
it's not the first time that he said
koala bears in this book and every
australian
every australian of course borg said
koala bears but i'm not going to get
into it people can't even agree at the
moment on what boys and girls means so
whether or not koalas are bears or not i
think can be passed over in silence
[Laughter]
but that is the end of the chapter let
me read the summary at the end of the
chapter here david rights
virtual reality is not just a technology
in which computers simulate the behavior
of physical environments the fact that
virtual reality is possible is an
important fact about the fabric of
reality it is the basis not only of
computation but of human imagination and
external experience science mathematics
art and fiction what are the ultimate
limits the full scope of virtual reality
and hence of computation science
imagination the rest in the next chapter
we shall see that in one respect the
scope of virtual reality is limited
while in another it is drastically
circumscribed goodbye
[Music]
so
up
[Music]